So the bootstrap principle, is if you
have a statistic that estimates some
population parameter that
you're interested in, but
you don't know that statistic's
sampling distribution.
Then the bootstrap principle,
is simply to use the distribution
defined by the observed data,
to investigate that sampling is for me to
estimate of that sampling distribution.
The bootstrap principle actually
doesn't require simulation,
in the same way that if we want to know
what is the distribution of the average
of 50 die rolls.
Well, we could maybe
mathematically figure that out.
Good luck.
But it's easier to do
that with simulation.
So we never kind of figure out
what's the limit of what you get
when you roll the die infinitely
many times, because, you know,
we can, we can approximate that so
well with Monte Carlo.
We're also only going to
cover a couple of aspects of
what you can do with your
bootstrapper samples.
It's a rich subject, and we're mostly
going to cover creating a confidence
interval and estimating standard errors.
So we'll go over those two things.
But let's go over
the general procedure again.
What you do is you take your,
your observe data.
And you simulate complete data sets by
drawing from the observed
data with replacement.
And this is approximately drawing,
in in, for
each of the simulated data sets you
calculate the statistic of interest, and
this is approximately drawing from the
sampling distribution of that statistic.
At least as far as the data approximates
the real population distribution.
So just as a reminder,
we're going to calculate the statistic for
each simulated data set, and then we're
going to use these simulated statistics to
either define a confidence interval or
to take the standard deviation of this
distribution in order to
calculate a standard error.
So, let's go through the bootstrap
algorithm in a little bit of detail, for
calculating a confidence interval or
bootstrap standard air for
the median from a set of N observations.
So, the data that we have
is a vector of length N.
Then, what we're going to do is re-sample
N observations with replacement
from the observed data to basically
get a re-sampled complete data set.
Remember, when you sample
from the observed data,
you're going to sample with replacement.
If you didn't do it with replacement,
then you would basically after
having simulated sampled N of them,
you would just have a copy of the data
set again just with the order permuted.
Instead it's important to sample with
replacement, which means that you likely
get some observations repeated on
multiple times, which is fine.
This is part of bootstrap resampling,
when you get a resampled data set,
in our example, we're going to take
the median, or if you're using a different
statistic, you'll simply take that
statistic, of the simulated data set.
Then you're going to repeat this step,
over and over.
I say B times.
Here me, where B is the number
of bootstrap re-samples.
You want B to be large, so
that your Monte Carlo error is small.
And what I mean by that is remember,
if we could, we would just figure out
the exact bootstrap distribution
without involving any resampling.
We would just know exactly what
the distribution of the median is from
a distribution that places probability
1 over N on each observed data point.
Instead we're going to do it via Monte
Carlo this process of re-sampling, so
you don't want the Monte Carlo error or
basically how long you've run your
computer, to be driving your results.
The easiest way to fix this is to
simply make B be fairly large,
10,000 or more simulations.
The medians that you get from this
process are approximately drawn
from the sampling distribution
of the median of N observations.
We're really sort of approximating the
population distribution, but that's okay.
There's a lot of theory that shows
that the bootstrap actually works.
When we do this, what we can do
with our bootstrap resamples
is the first thing you always want to draw
a density estimate or a histogram of them.
But you also could calculate their
standard deviation which will give you
a standard error of the median
an estimated standard error of the median.
You could take quantiles of your
bootstrap re-sampled medians and, say,
for example, the 2.5th and
97.5th quantile, and
those form are so-called bootstrap
confidence interval for the median.
So notice what we've done in this process
is we've figured out a very easy way
to develop a confidence interval for
the median,
without having to do anything
like fancy anstotics.
Let's go through some quick example code.
Remember the father son data.
Where our x, is our sons' heights.
We might, remember we assigned this
vector X to be the sons' heights.
I'm going to define B to be 10,000,
that's going to be my number
of bootstrap resamples.
And I've already previously
defined N as the length of X,
the number of observations that I have.
So, if I want to draw N complete
data sets with replacement,
a B complete data sets with replacement
from X, then I need N times B draws.
The R command sample
does this where it's X
as the vector that I'm sampling from,
N times B.
The number of times that I want to
draw from it and replace equals true.
In this case if I didn't
have replace equals true,
it would give me an error
because you can't draw N times B
elements from X which only has
N elements without replacement.
This now gives me a vector
of N times B samples from X.
And now I'm going to simply arrange them
into a matrix, with B rows and N columns.
So every row now, is a bootstrap resample.
And it has N observations.
So, I'm going to go along
the rows in the next line and
take the median for each row.
When I take my standard deviation
of my medians, I get 0.08473.
This is an estimated standard
error of the median.
If we want a confidence interval for
the median.
I'm going to take my vector
of re-sampled medians.
And I am going to simply
take the quantiles.
And I want a 95% intervals, so
I am going to take the 2.5 and
the 97.5 quantiles.
It gives a fairly tight confidence
interval in this case because
there's lots and lots of observed data.
Here's my histogram of
bootstrap resamples, and
this is just always a good thing to do.
I did it with ggplot, and so
here you see me assigning g
the output of the ggplot function.
Gggplot works on data frames, so I define
a data frame as my collection of medians.
And then my aesthetic my X
variable is the medians,
then I'm going to add to my plot I'm
going to add a layer that is a histogram,
the black means the bars,
the outside of the bars are black.
Fill being light blue means the inside of
the bars I wanted to be light blue, and
binwidth talks about the width of
the bins to create my his, histogram.
Then I type G to actually show the plot.
So this plot is an estimate, of
the sampling distribution of the median.
If we had the true
population distribution, and
we were to sample over and over again.
This would be a very good
estimate up to Monte Carlo error
of the sampling
distribution of the median.
Instead, we don't have the exact
population distribution we've replaced it
with the bootstrap principle of
resampling from the observed data.
And now instead we just get
this approximate, distribution
of this, this approximate sample
distribution of the median.
So a couple of final
notes on the bootstrap.
The way in which we presented
the bootstrap here is the so
called non-parametric bootstrap.
The confidence interval that I
showed you just taking the 2.5th and
97.5th percentiles is actually a somewhat
poorly performing confidence interval,
and you can improve on it very easily.
The one I would recommend, is called the
bias-corrected and accelerated interval,
BCa interval, and it's very easy to
implement in the bootstrap package in R.
You simply take your
bootstrap resamples and
pass it through this function, and
it just gives you the BCa interval.
It's basically a quick, little fix of what
quantiles you take to correct for a bias.
What I've done here,
is I've just given you a very basic
introduction to the bootstrap.
It is a,
an incredibly useful procedure and
it has lots of variations and
extremely wide applicability and a lot
of intricacies when you try to apply it in
settings like when you have time series.
Or when your have a regression model or
when you have longitudinal or
multi level data.